JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President Trump's
pick for secretary of labor,
Andrew Puzder,
withdraws from consideration, as
a number
of Senate Republicans join
Democrats in opposition.
Then:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Papers are being leaked. Things
are being
leaked. It's criminal action,
criminal act.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
slams intelligence
leaks amid new reports that his
aides were
in repeated contact with Russia
during the
campaign.
Also ahead: In another dramatic
shift, with
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
by his side,
Mr. Trump opens the door to
dropping U.S.
support for a two-state solution
in the Middle
East.
Plus, scientists fight back, the
nationwide
effort to protect environmental
data in an
uncertain political moment.
BRENDAN O'BRIEN, Programmer: If
we have the
foresight to back the stuff up
now, we may
be -- maybe later generations
will thank us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump's
Cabinet in
the making is reeling tonight
from another
body blow.
Andrew Puzder withdrew today as
the nominee
for labor secretary, two days
after National
Security Adviser Michael Flynn
resigned under
fire.
Our Lisa Desjardins is at the
Capitol, where
she's been covering this story.
Lisa, what happened?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, it was
Republicans.
They didn't have enough
Republican votes to
pass this confirmation -- to
have this confirmation
happen. And it was fast-moving
today, Judy.
Just this morning, John Cornyn,
who is in
charge of the vote counting for
Republicans
here, told reporters he will be
confirmed.
Just hours later, they didn't
have the votes.
Why?
I spoke to one of the senators,
Jeff Flake,
who wasn't yet a yes vote, and
he said the
main problem was Puzder's
revelation that
he had hired an undocumented
worker and had
failed to pay back taxes until
he was nominated.
Flake told me, Judy, for a labor
secretary,
you just can't ignore that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, with
Puzder now out
of the picture, we're hearing
from Republicans,
from the White House that they
think Democrats
are slow-rolling all the rest of
the president's
Cabinet nominees. Where does all
that stand?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
This is the
slowest confirmation process in
history, but
Democrats point out that, in
fact, many of
Trump's nominees did not get
their paperwork
in as quickly as in the past.
Let's look at where we are right
now in the
general. So far, the Senate has
confirmed
12 of President Trump's Cabinet
nominees.
One has been withdrawn, as we
mentioned, Mr.
Puzder tonight. Judy, that
leaves eight more
Cabinet nominees waiting in line
to go through
the Senate.
The next one is (AUDIO GAP).
There was a hiccup
on Mick Mulvaney just today, as
Senator John
McCain of Arizona said he, a
Republican, will
oppose him. Looks like he will
have the votes,
but that's not something -- they
want all
the Republicans on board his
nomination. They
don't have them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, we know
that's not
the only set of issues that's
roiling Congress
right now. The aftermath of the
departure
of General Flynn at the White
House is certainly
still drawing reaction.
What are you hearing about that?
LISA DESJARDINS: Another wild
day. Until just
three hours ago, the main issue
dominating
the news up here on Capitol Hill
about the
Trump White House was Russia.
After a tumultuous 24 hours,
President Trump
ignored reported contacts
between campaign
advisers and Russian
intelligence. Instead,
at a news conference with
Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu, he went
after the media
and those giving the media
information.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Papers are being leaked. Things
are being
leaked. It's criminal actions,
criminal act,
and it's been going on for a
long time -- before
me. But now it's really going
on, and people
are trying to cover up for a
terrible loss
that the Democrats had under
Hillary Clinton.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile, Mr.
Trump also
defended ousted National
Security Adviser
Michael Flynn. The initial
concern surrounded
Flynn's phone calls with
Russia's ambassador
last year, but after revelations
that he misled
the White House about those
calls, Flynn was
forced out this week.
DONALD TRUMP: I think he's been
treated very,
very unfairly by the media -- as
I call it,
the fake media, in many cases.
And I think
it's really a sad thing that he
was treated
so badly.
LISA DESJARDINS: The president
got no direct
questions during the news
conference about
the new turn in the story, and
ignored shouted
questions afterward.
QUESTION: Mr. President. can you
guarantee
that nobody on your campaign had
any contacts
with the Russians? Mr.
President, any questions
on Russia?
LISA DESJARDINS: That followed a
report in
The New York Times that aides
working in the
Trump campaign had -- quote --
"repeated contacts
with senior Russian intelligence
officials
in the year before the
election."
Reporter Matt Apuzzo worked on
that story.
MATT APUZZO, The New York Times:
It's really
the volume of those calls that
really caught
U.S. intelligence by surprise,
because they
didn't see anything like that in
other countries.
And, of course, it's the timing
that's the
issue. Is there collusion
between the Trump
campaign and the Russia hacking
efforts?
They don't have evidence to back
up, you know,
any charges of collusion.
LISA DESJARDINS: While the White
House said
relatively little, Capitol Hill
was abuzz.
Democratic senators canceled
their schedules
to hold a quickly convened
meeting. Their
leaders emerged calling for an
independent
counsel at the Justice
Department.
SEN. CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY),
Minority Leader:
And the reports of constant
contact between
the top officials in the Trump
campaign and
Russian intelligence are
chilling. I have
been in Congress for a long
time. I have never
seen anything like this.
LISA DESJARDINS: Democratic
Leader Chuck Schumer
is pushing for three things:
preservation
of all White House e-mails and
records dealing
with Russia, public testimony by
Trump officials
like Paul Manafort and Michael
Flynn, and
for Attorney General Jeff
Sessions, a top
Trump supporter in the campaign,
to recuse
himself from any Russia-related
probe.
House Minority Leader Nancy
Pelosi:
REP. NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
It just points to the need for
us to have
an outside independent
commission, nonpartisan
commission outside, with
subpoena power to
find the truth and what this
means to our
national security. The president
is flirting
with danger.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile,
Republican lawmakers
are watching closely. Senator
Lindsey Graham
told FOX News today that, if
there were inappropriate
contacts, Congress should launch
a bipartisan
investigation.
For now, Republican leaders are
signaling
they don't want any new
investigations. On
MSNBC, House Speaker Paul Ryan
endorsed the
Intelligence Committee
investigations already
under way.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
Russia has been trying to meddle
with our
country in our last elections.
That's established.
We know that. No one has -- no
one has made
evidence, no one has made the
claim that evidence
exists that Donald Trump or his
people were
in on it, were involved in that.
LISA DESJARDINS: The issue is
made more difficult
for Republicans by the large
number of unknowns
and unanswered questions about
relationships
between Russia and the Trump
world.
Again, Matt Apuzzo of The New
York Times:
MATT APUZZO: Was anybody in
Trump world aware
of or colluding with Russian
efforts to hack
Hillary's advisers or the DNC
and influence
the election? What were these
people talking
to senior Russian intelligence
authorities
about? Were they knowingly
talking to people
in the intelligence world?
One of them, Paul Manafort, told
us he never
knowingly spoke to anybody in
Russian intelligence,
and said, you know, it's not
like these guys
are wearing badges.
LISA DESJARDINS: As for the
Kremlin, Russian
spokesman Dmitry Peskov told
reporters today,
"Let's not believe anonymous
information."
Now, there does seem to be some
potential
bipartisan agreement. Senators,
Democratic
and Republican, that we talked
to today seem
to agree that they want to have
Michael Flynn
come to the Capitol to testify
in public.
When could that happen? I asked
Intelligence
Chairman Richard Burr, and he
said he hasn't
been invited yet because --
quote -- "We don't
even know what we would ask him
yet" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Lisa
Desjardins
at the Capitol.
Meanwhile, our own John Yang is
at the White
House.
Now, John, it was noted -- and
Lisa just reported
this -- the president today,
when asked about
Michael Flynn, went out of his
way to praise
this man who essentially he just
fired yesterday,
and we were told he'd lost faith
in him.
JOHN YANG: That's right, Judy.
He made it sound as if the press
had fired
him. And Sean Spicer, the press
secretary,
said that there's no
contradiction between
admiring a man who served his
country in the
military, but losing trust in
him.
He also went after the media,
calling it fake
news. We asked Sean Spicer, if
it hadn't been
for the stories, would Michael
Flynn still
be in the job? He said no,
because he had
misled the vice president, never
mind that
the vice president only learned
about that
from reading it in the
newspapers.
Asked what was fake about the
stories, Sean
Spicer responded, "I will have
to get back
to you on that."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, John, we
know separately
that -- now I'm trying to
remember what you
and I were going to talk about
-- separately
-- oh, I know -- about the
successor to General
Flynn. What you have learned
about that?
JOHN YANG: Indications are that
the leading
contender is former Vice Admiral
Bob Harward.
He's a former Navy SEAL. He was
a deputy to
the current defense secretary,
James Mattis,
when then-General Mattis ran
Central Command
for President Obama.
I'm told that an announcement
could come as
soon as the end of this week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Yang
reporting for us
from the White House, thank you.
In the day's other news: The
Russians rejected
any notion of returning Crimea
to Ukraine.
Just yesterday, White House
spokesman Sean
Spicer said President Trump
expects exactly
that. The Russians annexed
Crimea in March
of 2014, and, today, the Foreign
Ministry
in Moscow said, "We never give
back our territory."
U.S. Defense Secretary Jim
Mattis issued a
pointed warning today to NATO
allies on defense
spending. He said they will have
to do more,
or run the risk that the U.S.
will -- quote
-- "moderate its commitment to
the alliance."
Mattis attended his first NATO
defense ministers
meeting in Brussels and argued
President Trump's
case that the allies share more
of the burden.
JAMES MATTIS, U.S. Secretary of
Defense: It's
a fair demand that all who
benefit from the
best defense in the world carry
their proportionate
share of the necessary costs to
defend freedom.
And we should never forget,
ultimately, it
is freedom that we defend here
at NATO.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Trump
administration wants
NATO members to meet an
established target
of spending 2 percent of their
economic output
on defense. The U.S. spends more
than 3.5
percent.
In Malaysia, police arrested a
woman in the
apparent assassination of Kim
Jong-nam, the
estranged half-brother of North
Korea's supreme
leader. Malaysian news accounts
say two women
splashed a chemical on him at
the Kuala Lumpur
Airport on Monday. U.S. and
South Korean officials
say they were North Korea
agents. Meanwhile,
an autopsy on Kim's body began
today at this
medical institute in Malaysia.
That's despite
North Korean objections.
The European Union's Parliament
approved a
landmark trade deal with Canada
today after
years of negotiations.
Supporters at the Parliament,
in Strasbourg, France, argued
that the deal
will counter rising
protectionism, while,
outside, hundreds of protesters
warned it
will do more harm than good.
ARTIS PABRIKS, European People's
Party: We
made now a very historic trade
deal between
the best partners in the world,
actually,
which we can find, because I
really believe
that, apart from Canada, there
are very few
who match the standards of
common values outside
the European Union.
WOMAN: It's a threat to
democracy, a threat
to human rights, a threat to the
environment.
And I suppose that what we can
do now from
here is to put pressure on our
governments,
put pressure on our MEPs to do
their job,
you know? And it's not over.
It's not over
until it's over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To be fully
implemented, the
trade deal will also need
approval from various
regional and national
parliaments across Europe.
China formally announced today
that it has
granted President Trump a
10-year trademark.
He now has the exclusive right
to use his
name for building construction
services there
through 2027. Mr. Trump already
has 77 trademarks
in China. He has been trying to
gain this
one for the last decade.
Back in this country, nearly
3,000 workers
at Boeing voted on whether to
unionize their
plant in North Charleston, South
Carolina.
It is a key test for unions
trying to organize
in factories across the South,
where most
workers are non-union. The vote
at Boeing
involved the International
Association of
Machinists and Aerospace
Workers.
And, on Wall Street, stocks
rallied again
on upbeat news about consumer
prices and retail
sales. The Dow Jones industrial
average gained
107 points to close at 20611.
The Nasdaq rose
nearly 37, and the S&P 500 added
11.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
I talk to
a former Trump adviser accused
of having ties
to Russia; the president's
evolving approach
to Israel; and much more.
to Russia; the president's
evolving approach
to Israel; and much more.
The swirl of questions
surrounding General
Flynn's resignation as national
security adviser,
and the new reports of regular
contacts between
the Trump campaign and Russia,
has Democrats
on Capitol Hill, as we heard,
calling for
an independent investigation.
One of them is Senator Amy
Klobuchar of Minnesota.
I spoke to her a short time ago,
and started
by asking what questions she
has.
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D),
Minnesota: Well, I
believe this is much more than
the resignation
of one national security
adviser.
You already had the Trump
campaign chairman
step aside because of contacts
with Russia,
and now this new report that
there were multiple
contacts between people in the
campaign and
Russian intelligence people. So,
that's why
I think we have to get to the
bottom of it.
This is about a fundamental
concept, and that
is a free democracy that should
be free from
foreign influences. And we
already have had
our 17 intelligence agencies
tell us that
there's been an attempt to
influence our election.
And now we're finding out that
these contacts
were ongoing.
So, we need to know, who did
Flynn work with?
Who did he talk to? What did he
talk about
to the Russian ambassador? And,
also, why
was this happening? I think
that's the biggest
overriding question for our
national security.
Why was the Trump administration
so eager
to placate the Russians and make
friends with
them, when they have done so
many horrific
things, including invading
countries that
are our allies?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you have
information beyond
what's been reported in the
press about that?
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, I will
say, when
I was out with Senator McCain
and Graham in
the Baltics and Ukraine and
Georgia, I spent
a significant amount of time
with President
Poroshenko in Ukraine.
I don't have the classified
information for
you to share, but I do have just
my experience
of learning that 10,000 people
were killed
there, of seeing that these
cyber-attacks
have been happening for years,
where it's
really the modus operandi of
Russia, where
they have infiltrated Estonia's
system, Lithuania's
system.
This is what they do. They try
to bring down
these democracies with
cyber-attacks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you think
this should
be investigated? We know that
the Senate Intelligence
Committee, the bipartisan
Intelligence Committee,
is looking into this. Are you
prepared to
leave it at that, because some
Democrats have
said that it should be an
outside, independent
commission?
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR: I think we
can do both
at the same time.
The Intelligence Committee is
important because
they're going to be able to get
underneath
the surface with classified
information. Hopefully,
they can declassify some of it.
And then,
secondly, this independent
commission -- I
was one of the early sponsors of
this bill
and announced it with the
leaders of the bill,
because I think you need an
9/11-type commission
to really look at what happened,
so that you
can also make recommendations so
it doesn't
happen in the future.
I think we can do both things at
once.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why do you need
an outside
commission? I mean, I talked
yesterday with
Senator Mark Warner, who, of
course, is vice
chairman of that Intelligence
Committee. He
said, at this point, he thinks
that the Intelligence
Committee itself can handle it.
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well,
Senator Warner and
I are very good friends. And I
have full faith
in his leadership and those of
the other senators
on the committee.
But the advantage of starting
this up, which
will, by the way, take a much
longer period
of time, is that you can put in
place some
experts that can look at this
really from
a different perspective. And
that's like the
9/11 Commission did. What
happened, and what
steps can be taken, so we can
protect our
democracy and others in the
future?
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also were
telling me, Senator
Klobuchar, that you and other
Democrats want
to see the new attorney general,
Jeff Sessions,
recuse himself from any
investigation going
on inside the government. Why?
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well,
there's actually
a specific rule on this, Judy.
And it says, no DOJ employee may
participate
in a criminal investigation or
prosecution
if he has a personal or
political relationship
with any person or organization
substantially
involved in the conduct that is
the subject
of the investigation or
prosecution or would
be directly affected by the
outcome.
Senator Sessions, who have I
worked with extensively
on the Judiciary Committee,
while I have had
a good working relationship with
him, he has
made it clear that he's not
going to take
on cases where there's
conflicts.
While he hasn't said that about
this case,
I don't know how you get around
it. He was
an early supporter of President
Trump. He
was involved in the campaign.
Flynn was involved
in the campaign. And I just
think it's better
that he recuse himself, as does
Senator Feinstein
and many other members of the
Judiciary Committee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, one
other thing. I'm
sure you know President Trump is
saying that
so much of this is fabricated by
the news
media. He's saying the news
media is blowing
this out of proportion, that the
facts just
are not there to bear this out.
And he's more upset about the
leaking on the
part of the intelligence
community than he
is about what the leaks
purportedly show.
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR: You know, he
has every
right to go after that leaking.
As you know,
President Obama did that as
well, although,
as Senator Corker said
yesterday, President
Obama ran a pretty tight ship.
And there are more leaks going
on than we
have during the -- practically
the entire
Obama administration. So, the
president has
a right to look into that.
That is not the big story here,
though. The
big story here is that the
national security
adviser resigned after only 26
days, and that,
in this sea of problems with
Russia and the
fact that we have got to stand
tall with our
allies, and that we have 17
intelligence agencies
-- no one is making that up.
Then you would have to discount
the clear
evidence from 17 intelligence
agencies of
the U.S. government that this
had actually
occurred.
It occurred. It's a fact. And
the only question
now is how we respond to it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Amy
Klobuchar of Minnesota,
we thank you very much.
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you,
Judy. It was
great to be on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
to a former
member of the Trump campaign
foreign policy
team, among those alleged to
have been in
contact with Russian officials.
Carter Page manages an energy
investment company,
and he joins me now.
Mr. Page, thank you for joining
us.
So, briefly, start out by
telling us how you
knew or know Donald Trump. And
what kind of
work did you do on the campaign
last year?
CARTER PAGE, Former Trump
Campaign Foreign
Policy Adviser: You know, I --
it's funny.
You were just talking about
leaks with your
former -- former interviewee.
I don't talk about the internal
works that
I did to help the campaign. I --
I was a junior
member of the campaign's foreign
policy advisory
group, and I didn't -- had --
you know, compared
to other people that were much
-- had much
more direct interaction with Mr.
Trump, who
I never actually briefed or was
in any small
meetings with.
I went to many rallies with him,
but never
any direct meetings. So, you
know, I think
there's a tendency to talk about
a lot of
internal dealings in the U.S.
government,
as you were talking about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me
just...
CARTER PAGE: And I think -- yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me just move
on by saying,
but you were a member of his
foreign policy
team. We were just talking about
that a moment
ago.
CARTER PAGE: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But my first
question, then,
after that, Carter Page, is to
ask you, you're
aware of these reports out there
that there
were officials in the Trump
campaign who were
in repeated contact with Russian
officials,
Russian intelligence officials
during 2016.
Were you one of those campaign
officials?
CARTER PAGE: Well, Judy, you
know, that -- going
back to the question to Sean
Spicer about
fake news, I mean, this -- yes,
I'm aware
of the reports, which I saw on
the front page
of The New York Times today.
But I think I can actually
answer that question
as to why that was fake news.
That was just
a regurgitation of old reports,
based on the
dodgy dossier that the Clinton
campaign out
with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in other
words...
CARTER PAGE: So, yes, I'm aware
-- I'm aware
of these ongoing public
relations attacks
against the administration and
people who
have supported it. But...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me just
stop and
say the reports are citing
intelligence agencies.
So, we're talking about the CIA,
the FBI.
So, you're saying these agencies
are not to
be believed, or the news media
is making this
up, or what?
(CROSSTALK)
CARTER PAGE: Well, what I'm
saying, what I'm
saying is, you know, at least
last year, they
were responding to false
evidence, which is
an obstruction of justice, false
evidence
given to the Intelligence
Committee -- intelligence
community by the Clinton
campaign.
Now that's pretty
well-established, you know,
with this dodgy dossier that
came out last
month. So, I think it's pretty
clear evidence.
And, you know, in terms of it
being fake news
today, the big front-page story
on The New
York Times, I actually sent them
a copy of
a real dossier that I submitted
to the Civil
Rights Division of the U.S.
Department of
Justice over the weekend.
And, unfortunately -- to one of
the authors
of that front-page article --
and that never
got included at all. So, you
know, it's -- it's
very one-sided.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We only have a
limited amount
of time here, so I want to use
this time to
everyone's advantage, and ask
you, you were
in Russia. You have worked in
Russia for a
number of years. You clearly
know Russian
officials.
Where do you think this comes
from? Were you
in any kind of contact last year
with Russian
government officials?
CARTER PAGE: It comes from deep
animosity
and deep negative feelings
against the Russians.
And I think, you know, you just
have to look
back at the history of the last
70 years,
and it's pretty clear where that
originates
from.
And Mrs. Clinton and her team
did a great
job of ramping that up. And it
continues to
this day, with the help of the
likes of Sally
Yates and others that were
holdovers from
the Obama administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're saying
-- so, you're
saying that that, whatever you
-- what you
describe as animosity toward the
Russians
is not deserved.
We just heard Senator Amy
Klobuchar talk about
the Russians having the kind of
an agenda
that the U.S. could never share,
that they're
undermining democracies across
Eastern Europe.
You don't agree with that view
of Russia?
CARTER PAGE: I view it as a
two-way street.
And, you know, what I talked
about in my speech
in Moscow in July, and what
President Trump
and President Putin talked about
in their
initial call, was the concept of
mutual respect.
I think, if both sides are
acting respectfully
and really thinking through and
understanding
the other side's perspectives,
that takes
care of a lot of it.
So, you know, absolutely, there
-- you know,
the senator is right that
there's a lot of
things that need to be repaired.
But I think
continuing these fake news, fake
intel reports
is only going to continue
driving us into
the gutter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you have any
meetings -- I
will ask again -- did you have
any meetings
last year with Russian officials
in Russia,
outside Russia, anywhere?
CARTER PAGE: I had no meetings,
no meetings.
I might have said hello to a few
people as
they were walking by me at my
graduation -- the
graduation speech that I gave in
July, but
no meetings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in other
words, these reports
that are citing, in very
specific detail,
what intelligence agencies say
they have discovered,
continuous, repeated contacts
between the
campaign and Russia, you're
saying that's
entirely made up? Is that what
you're saying?
CARTER PAGE: Judy, I don't think
they said
discovered. I think they -- that
they're looking
at it.
So, it's a nice way for the
enemies of the
administration and the enemies
of positive
U.S.-Russia relations to keep
stirring this
negative pot over and over
again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well...
CARTER PAGE: And, admittedly,
they have done
quite a good job over the last
year. So, I
have to -- I have to hand it to
them as excellent
politicians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And are you
cooperating with
any federal investigators who
are looking
into this? Have you been asked,
for example,
by the FBI or another agency to
answer questions?
And if you were called on to go
before, say,
a Senate committee
investigation, would you
be willing to do that?
CARTER PAGE: I have never been
asked by anyone
in the FBI or any of the other
agencies over
the last year.
And I think, yes, I would love
to have the
opportunity to speak with the
Senate. And
I have offered to a few of the
senators to
speak with them and maybe offer
them some
realistic views of actually
what's happening
in the world. But I think, you
know, there's
-- there's a great level of
ignorance.
And so one question to ask your
other senators
you speak to is, have they ever
actually stepped
foot in Russia or talked to
Russian people?
And I think, you know, that's
very strong
correlation with the ignorance
that you see
today...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
finally..
CARTER PAGE: ... due to the lack
of knowledge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sorry. Excuse me.
Just very quickly, finally, what
should the
U.S. relationship with Russia
be? You're clearly
arguing for something far more
positive than
what exists right now.
CARTER PAGE: I'm not saying
positive.
I'm saying more practical and
realistic and
just having a open, respectful
dialogue, in
which you really think about the
other side
and, you know, look to build
your own country
up here in the United States
through better,
positive relations, and not
getting swirled
out of control with these
ongoing distractions,
which are taking away attention
from bigger
national security threats and
causing disruptions,
great -- very unfortunately, for
the United
States.
So, I think there's a lot of
work to be done.
And I think Russia can be a
tremendous ally
for helping in that regard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carter Page,
former foreign
policy adviser to the Trump
campaign, thank
you very much for talking with
us.
CARTER PAGE: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
scientists scramble
to back up data they say is
threatened by
the Trump administration; and
the debate over
carrying guns on campus 50 years
after a shooting
at the University of Texas.
But now to the president's
meeting with Israel's
prime minister at the White
House today, and
what it means for the U.S. role
in the Israeli-Palestinian
relationship.
Hari Sreenivasan has that.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I'm looking at two-state and
one-state, and
I like the one that both parties
like.
HARI SREENIVASAN: With that,
President Trump
served notice that he is not
wedded to longstanding
U.S. support for a two-state
solution to resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
He spoke with Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu at his side.
DONALD TRUMP: I thought for a
while the two-state
looked like it may be the easier
of the two.
But, honestly, if Israel and the
Palestinians
are happy, I'm happy with the
one they like
the best.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The president
urged a wider
peace pact as well, involving
other Middle
Eastern countries.
DONALD TRUMP: And it is
something that is
very different, hasn't been
discussed before.
And it's actually a much bigger
deal, a much
more important deal, in a sense.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mr. Trump also
left open
the possibility of moving the
U.S. Embassy
from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem,
despite Palestinian
demands that East Jerusalem be
their capital.
Netanyahu called for the U.S.
and Israel to
seize this moment, and he laid
out his conditions
for peace.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister:
First, the Palestinians must
recognize the
Jewish state. They have to stop
calling for
Israel's destruction. Second, in
any peace
agreement, Israel must retain
the overriding
security control of the entire
area west of
the Jordan River.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
Palestinians vehemently
oppose that second element. They
also flatly
reject Israel's ramped-up
construction in
Jewish settlements in the West
Bank. That
point elicited this exchange
today.
DONALD TRUMP: I'd like to see
you hold back
on settlements for a little bit.
We'll work
something out. But I would like
to see a deal
be made. I think a deal will be
made.
So let's see what we do.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU: Let's try
it.
DONALD TRUMP: Doesn't sound too
optimistic,
but he's a good negotiator.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Netanyahu
later added:
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU: I believe
that the issue
of the settlements is not the
core of the
conflict, nor does it really
drive the conflict.
I think it's an issue that has
to be resolved
in the context of peace
negotiations, and
we also are going to speak about
it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As the two
leaders talked
at the White House, Palestinian
officials
say President Mahmoud Abbas met
secretly Tuesday
night with CIA Chief Mike Pompeo
in the West
Bank city of Ramallah.
Joining me to delve further into
the news
out of today's White House news
conference,
and where the
Israeli-Palestinian issue stands
at the beginning of the Trump
administration,
are Shibley Telhami. He's the
Anwar Sadat
professor for peace and
development at the
University of Maryland. And
Tamara Cofman
Wittes, she's a senior fellow in
the Middle
East Policy Center at the
Brookings Institution,
and she served as deputy
assistant secretary
of state for near eastern
affairs in the Obama
administration from November of
2009 to January
2012.
Shibley, I want to start with
you.
What did both of these leaders
get out of
this, before they even begin to
having conversations?
SHIBLEY TELHAMI, Anwar Sadat
Professor for
Peace and Development,
University of Maryland:
First, domestically.
Mr. Netanyahu is obviously
looking back home.
He is in trouble in an
investigation on corruption.
He is being pressured from the
ultra-right.
So, he wants to show, at a time
when Israelis
are uncertain about where the
president is
going to, where President Trump
is going to
go, he wants to show that he can
make a deal
with the president, that he can
have a working
relationship with him, that he
can deliver.
It helps him at home.
With Mr. Trump, Mr. Netanyahu is
very popular
in the Republican Party. In my
polls actually,
he's up there with Ronald Reagan
as one of
the most popular leaders in the
world, and
especially among the evangelical
right.
So, just by virtue of looking
like they're
cordial in the photo-op, they
both score points
at home. Obviously, they also
score points
on some issues that we knew they
would score
points on, for example, the
stated American
support for Israeli security,
the fight on
terrorism, the Iran issue.
Those are issues where there
isn't much difference,
at least rhetorically. And those
obviously
are the ones that register. But,
then, of
course, we turn to the more
central question
where there will be inevitably
some disagreements,
the Israel and Palestinian
question.
(CROSSTALK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes. That's
right.
Tamara Wittes, I want to get to
you with that,
the one-state, two-state
statement by the
president today. The U.S. has
always been
committed to a peaceful
resolution to this,
but why is the president's
announcement today
so important?
TAMARA COFMAN WITTES, Brookings
Institution:
Well, look, I think it's always
been the American
position, enunciated previously
by the U.S.
presidents, that we can't want
peace more
than the parties themselves, and
that the
parties have to agree to a
solution of their
conflict, and we will support
them in doing
that.
What's changed here is that, for
a long time,
under President George W. Bush,
and then under
President Obama, the U.S. has
agreed with
both parties that a two-state
solution, that
is, independent, sovereign
states for Israel
and for Palestine, is the only
stable, lasting
solution for peace in the
Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
Today, Donald Trump suggested
that there might
be some other outcome that could
deliver a
lasting peace. And that does
throw into question
the objective of any
negotiations.
SHIBLEY TELHAMI: If I may add on
this one,
just in terms of what is missing
here, what
is missing is, when the
statement is, it's
up to the parties to negotiate,
with no reference
to international law or previous
agreements
or some framework, you're
leaving it up to
the Israelis and Palestinians, a
very unequal
relationship.
They're not going to be able to
do this on
their own, without reference to
what has been
agreed or some ground rule.
That's number
one.
Number two, the president throws
in there
the one state. He only gives two
alternatives,
two states, one state. Well, if
you have one
state, it can be only one of two
days ways,
not a Jewish state, democratic
states for
Arabs and Jews, but not a Jewish
state, or
an apartheid state.
By the way, if Obama had put
that proposal
on the table just like Trump
stated it, he
would have been attacked from
all over the
place from the right by
suggesting the one-state
solution could be on the table.
So, this one is really
interesting, because
you have got some agreements
both on the left
and right about the
impossibility of a two-state,
but what they want is something
completely
different.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Shibley
Telhami, just staying
with you for a second, is a
one-state solution
a nonstarter for the
Palestinians?
SHIBLEY TELHAMI: No, it's not a
nonstarter,
even though, I think, for many
of them, obviously,
they don't think it as
realistic. When you
ask them, do you think it's
going to happen,
most say no.
But if they think they can -- if
they can
have a full, equal relationship
with Israel,
well, of course they would,
because, ultimately,
that will be a majority. That's
not a nonstarter.
But it's a nonstarter if they're
not going
to have equal relations.
But it is a nonstarter for the
Israelis, undoubtedly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tamara Wittes,
both men
said that the goal might be more
achievable
if more regional partners got
involved. What
are the possible repercussions
if there are
more people at the table?
TAMARA COFMAN WITTES: Well,
look, I think
this is an idea that has
actually been tossed
around for a while. It's
something that President
Bush and Secretary Condoleezza
Rice tried
to do at their Annapolis
conference, bring
together the region as a whole,
partly to
compensate for Palestinian
weakness, and to
put more on the table that's
attractive to
Israel, in terms of regional
security and
stability and regional
cooperation.
So, in principle, expanding the
pie actually
does give you more options for
resolving the
conflict. In practice, however,
the Arab states
have made clear over and over
again that they
are not going to get in front of
the Palestinians
in solving this conflict. They
are going to
go where the Palestinians are
willing to go,
and not beyond.
I still don't see any reason to
think that
that has changed. And so I think
this sort
of outside-in approach will last
only as long
as the Arab governments think
that the Palestinians
want it to last.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Shibley
Telhami, is there
-- Prime Minister Netanyahu
started saying
today that basically there are
lots of things
that he has in common with Arab
states, say,
for example, their fear of a
more powerful
Iran.
Would all of these Arab states,
in that shared
fear or concern with Israel,
would they put
the Palestinian state on the
back-burner?
SHIBLEY TELHAMI: First, he's
right that there
are a lot of common interests.
And that shows.
And, obviously, you know, the
president of
Egypt, the king of Jordan, the
leader of the
UAE, they have some cooperative
relationships
strategically, whether it's on
Iran or fighting
terrorism.
And, also, they all have working
relations
with Trump, and even with Putin,
as the president
of Russia. So, in some ways, you
have this
kind of strategic picture.
But the big elephant in the room
is the Israel-Palestine
question. It always has been. As
Tamara said,
you can put -- if it weren't for
that, of
course, then you can have it.
Now, what Netanyahu wants to do
is to show
to the Israeli public that he
can build settlements
and not really make the
concessions that are
needed on the Palestinian issue,
and still
make peace with the Arab states.
And he wants
Trump to help him.
Now, one of the -- that's the
way that Arabs
have interpreted historically.
Well, interestingly,
in the news conference today,
look at the
body language. Netanyahu was the
one to say,
this is essentially my plan that
I taught
Trump to advocate, instead of
letting it even
look like a Trump plan, because
his interest
is ultimately to send a message
at home that
he's the one who is making Trump
do it, rather
than to have the Arabs have a
fig leaf to
come on board.
I think many of them might play
with Trump.
They don't want to say no to
him. They have
their own self-interests to want
to play.
The Saudis remain a big
question. But, ultimately,
I think, when push comes to
shove, the Palestinian
issue may be just a fig leaf for
something
other than Israeli-Palestinian
peace.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Shibley Telhami.
TAMARA COFMAN WITTES: Yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I'm sorry.
Tamara Wittes, very quickly, you
want to wrap
up?
TAMARA COFMAN WITTES: Sure.
Just to add, I think that what
is really bringing
Israel and the Arab states
together right
now is a common sense of threat.
It's not
necessarily a common vision for
the region's
future.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Tamara Wittes,
Shibley Telhami, thank you both.
SHIBLEY TELHAMI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Almost since the
day President
Trump was sworn in, members of a
loosely aligned
grassroots movement composed of
academics,
programmers, researchers and
scientists have
been archiving government data
they fear could
disappear.
Miles O'Brien looks in on one of
those efforts
for our weekly science series,
Leading Edge.
JEROME WHITINGTON, New York
University: Psyched
to see everybody in the room.
Really exciting.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's early, cold,
and Saturday,
and yet this room at New York
University is
standing room only. A few
hundred volunteers
are here to download and save
scientific data
created and curated by the
federal government.
JEROME WHITINGTON: Without the
data, you don't
have environmental regulation.
MILES O'BRIEN: Anthropology
Professor Jerome
Whitington is one of the
organizers of this
data rescue event, the eighth in
an ongoing,
open-ended series which began
after the election.
JEROME WHITINGTON: Now, one of
the things
we're going to accomplish at
this event is,
we're going to do a lot of work
to get hard-to-access
data sets, things that previous
events have
struggled to get.
MILES O'BRIEN: They are focused
primarily
on the essential science used to
create environmental
regulations. They worry the
Trump administration's
anti-regulatory bent and
outright denial of
peer-reviewed climate science
might put the
data in jeopardy.
JEROME WHITINGTON: We're less
worried about
it being outright deleted and
disappearing,
and more worried about it
becoming unusable
or inaccessible in specific
ways.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, they are
systematically
building a data refuge in the
cloud on servers
hosted by Amazon.
Bethany Wiggin directs the
University of Pennsylvania
program in environmental
humanities. She is
an organizer of the data refuge
project.
BETHANY WIGGIN, University of
Pennsylvania:
We have always thought of data
refuge as providing
an insurance policy. The
situation is quite
urgent. Events on the federal
level are moving
quickly. The changes being made
to programs
is happening quite fast. The
situation is
very uncertain.
MILES O'BRIEN: Federally funded
science has
been maligned and cut back
before, but the
Trump administration has upped
the ante. While
no huge data sets have
completely disappeared,
some have been made harder to
access or even
find.
The official White House Web
site no longer
contains any reference to
climate change.
A Trump space adviser threatened
to pull the
plug on earth science at NASA.
Department
of Energy scientists received a
questionnaire
asking what climate change
conferences they
attended and what materials they
shared.
And the president's choice to
run the EPA,
Oklahoma Attorney General Scott
Pruitt, sued
the agency 13 times and tried to
block Obama
administration climate change
regulations.
Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders
grilled Pruitt
at his confirmation hearing.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (I),
Vermont: Ninety-seven
percent of the scientists who
wrote articles
in peer-reviewed journals
believe that human
activity is the fundamental
reason we are
seeing climate change. You
disagree with that?
SCOTT PRUITT (R), EPA
Administrator Nominee:
I believe the ability to measure
with precision
the degree of human activity's
impact on the
climate is subject to more
debate on whether
the climate is changing or
whether human activity
contributes to it.
MILES O'BRIEN: For his part, Mr.
Trump has
tweeted that climate change is a
hoax cooked
up by the Chinese, and
repeatedly criticized
federal environmental
regulations.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I believe strongly in clean
water and clean
air, but I don't believe that
what they say
-- I think it's a big scam for a
lot of people
to make a lot of money. In the
meantime, China
is eating our lunch because they
don't partake
in all the rules and regulations
that we do.
RUSH HOLT (D), Former U.S.
Congressman: This
is Benjamin Franklin's grandson.
MILES O'BRIEN: Physicist and
former New Jersey
Democratic Congressman Rush Holt
is CEO of
the American Association for the
Advancement
of Science.
It is the world's largest
general scientific
society, with more than 120,000
members.
RUSH HOLT: When they hear public
officials
talk about alternative facts,
they're aghast.
And when they don't know what a
new administration
is going to do in support for
research, they
get very apprehensive about
their ability
to continue to do the research
that they think
is so valuable.
MILES O'BRIEN: Holt was among
the witnesses
when the House Science Committee
conducted
its first hearing of the Trump
era. No one
was surprised that the
Environmental Protection
Agency was the focus.
The Republican chairman of the
committee,
Lamar Smith of Texas, is a
longtime, staunch
critic of the EPA.
REP. LAMAR SMITH (R), Texas:
There is now
an opportunity to right the ship
at the EPA
and steer the agency in the
right direction.
The EPA should be open and
accountable to
the American people and use
legitimate science.
RUSH HOLT: Scientists are
fiercely independent.
They would resent horribly if
they felt their
work was being manipulated. It's
not.
MILES O'BRIEN: Also testifying
that day, the
EPA's deputy administrator under
George W.
Bush, Jeff Holmstead. He is a
partner at Bracewell,
a Houston-based law firm that
represents corporate
clients in the energy sector.
JEFF HOLMSTEAD, Bracewell: EPA
tends to focus
on the science that supports the
regulatory
role that it sees for itself,
and sometimes
doesn't pay enough attention to
science that
cuts the other way.
I think it would be valuable to
EPA if they
had a more balanced perspective
on a lot of
these scientific questions that
they're looking
at.
MILES O'BRIEN: While scientists
wait to see
what shoes might drop, a rumor
mill echoes
across the Twitterverse.
Most agencies are laying low,
avoiding controversy
in public channels. The EPA's
last official
tweet was the day before the
inauguration.
Meanwhile, alternative, or
rogue, accounts
emerge constantly, some
apparently authored
by worried employees inside
agencies, others
by sympathetic, connected
outsiders. They
are flares from a science
community under
siege.
Are scientists in a panic? Is
that what it
is? What's going on?
KEITH COWING, NASA Watch: They
know where
the panic button is, and they
look at it once
or twice a day.
MILES O'BRIEN: Keith Cowing is a
former NASA
biologist who founded the
watchdog Web site
NASA Watch 20 years ago. He's
the proto-rogue,
and now he says everybody seems
to be joining
in.
KEITH COWING: Nobody has said,
shut that database
down, take that off your Web
site. But what's
going to happen when you have
got this giant,
bubbling, simmering social media
crowd, and
they go from being worried about
things that
might happen to things that are
happening?
There's a colossal hair trigger
waiting out
there.
MILES O'BRIEN: In the meantime,
data refuge
is as much therapeutic as it is
prophylactic.
Programmer Brendan O'Brien -- no
relation
-- showed me how they're doing
their work.
BRENDAN O'BRIEN, Programmer: The
toughest
part about this is figuring out
what this
all means and to be able to
archive it in
a sensible form.
MILES O'BRIEN: Data refuge
organizers sent
questionnaires to 65,000
scientists to determine
how to prioritize the gargantuan
task.
So far, they have received 7,500
responses.
As they march through the
databases, they
are simultaneously developing
tools to organize
the effort, protect the
integrity of the data,
and make an app for widespread
use.
BRENDAN O'BRIEN: If we have the
foresight
to back the stuff up now, we may
be -- maybe
later generations will thank us.
MILES O'BRIEN: Scientists are
also planning
a public campaign to save their
enterprise.
On April 22, Earth Day, they
intend to march
en masse on Washington, an
experiment to test
the volatile interaction between
pressure,
politics, belief, and facts.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This week,
"Independent Lens"
on PBS is presenting a
captivating reexamination
of America's first mass school
shooting.
"Tower" includes archival
footage, new animation
and untold witness stories who
unpack the
horror that left 16 dead and
three dozen wounded
at the University of Texas,
Austin, in 1966.
Today, Texas is one of nine
states that allow
concealed weapons to be carried
on public
college campuses, prompting
vigorous debate,
as we see in this "Independent
Lens" extra.
NICK ROLAND, Student: My name is
Nick Roland.
I'm a Ph.D student here at U.T.
Should be
graduating this year with a
degree in U.S.
history. Went to Virginia Tech
for undergrad.
And I was active-duty Army for
four years.
My routine is just like anyone
else. You know,
I get up, eat breakfast. The
only difference
is that I put a handgun in my
bag before I
get on my bike and ride to
campus.
So, this is it. I know that it's
loaded. It's
got the loaded chamber
indicator. So, then
I'm just going to place it here.
Once I get to campus, typically
going to go
somewhere where I can discreetly
put my weapon
on my hip. And I'm just going to
holster it
and then place it right here on
my hip.
MICHAEL CARGILL, Owner, Central
Texas Gun
Works: Campus carry went into
effect August
the 1st of 2016, which means
that a person
with a handgun license can now
carry a handgun,
concealed, inside of a building
of a college
campus.
My name is Michael Cargill. I'm
the owner
of Central Texas Gun Works,
which is a gun
store here in Austin, Texas. I
carry a .45,
a .38 Special, and a
.9-millimeter. I love
it. I like walking to the
grocery store. I
like going to the movie
theaters. I like going
to all those places.
And now finally we can carry
those same facilities
on a college campus. Woo-hoo!
(APPLAUSE)
(LAUGHTER)
ANA LOPEZ, Student: Hey, how do
you all feel
about guns on campus?
WOMAN: Weird.
ANA LOPEZ: Come support Students
Against Campus
Carry.
My name is Ana Lopez. I'm a
sophomore at the
University of Texas. And I'm
vice president
of Students Against Campus Carry
at U.T.
Invite your friends to stop by
and sign up.
A college campus is somewhere
where you should
be able to argue with someone
and have different
beliefs. And in the presence of
guns, my freedom
of speech personally is totally
stifled.
MAN: The final version is due
Tuesday in class?
LISA MOORE, Professor,
University of Texas,
Austin: I'm Lisa Moore and I'm a
professor
of English and women's and
gender studies
here at the University of Texas,
Austin.
The campus carry law makes it
really hard
for us to do our jobs as
instructors. Students
are allowed to bring guns to my
classroom.
I really consider that
interchange of teaching
and learning that happens in a
college classroom
to be something of a sacred
vocation.
It has introduced a level of
tension, a level
of wariness into the classroom
setting that
I just find kind of
heartbreaking, frankly.
MAN: Fire.
(GUNSHOTS)
MAN: And this is about their
personal safety.
They are civilians that are
carrying the firearm
for personal protection.
JIM LEHRER, PBS: More than 30
people were
shot to death today at Virginia
Tech University
in Blacksburg, Virginia. It was
the deadliest
mass shooting in American
history.
NICK ROLAND: I was a senior that
year when
it happened. It was hard because
I really
loved Virginia Tech. And I think
it's a really
special campus and community.
So, yes, it
was shocking, traumatic. It felt
like somebody
had attacked my family.
Had someone in one of those
classrooms been
armed, I think it would have
made a difference,
certainly. People do deserve to
have a fighting
chance. And the concealed carry
gives them
another option for self-defense
in that type
of situation.
ANA LOPEZ: I debated with Nick,
like, a couple
months ago. And I get it. And I
can't put
myself in his situation
But causing everybody else to
live in fear
like you is counterproductive.
People often
forget that my university was
the site for
the first recorded mass shooting
in U.S. history.
And that's usually brushed under
the rug.
RAMIRO MARTINEZ, Retired Texas
Ranger: Here's
where some of the bullets hit.
My name is Ramiro Martinez. Back
in 1966,
I was with the Austin Police
Department. Together,
with other officers, we took
down the sniper.
Right here is where he died.
And, at that
time, I started waving the
shotgun and hollering
down below, "Stop shooting." But
they kept
shooting.
I have been asked about my
opinion about concealed
handgun campus carry. And I'm
against it.
So, we don't need young people,
who are just
a little over 21, probably a
little bit immature,
to be carrying guns on the
campus.
NICK ROLAND: The reality is,
there are vastly
more guns in this country than
there are people.
We're awash in guns. My solution
to that is
not to disarm the people that
aren't committing
acts of violence. It's to give
them a chance
to defend themselves.
RAMIRO MARTINEZ: If a citizen
had been out
here with a gun, and I saw him,
and I didn't
know him from Adam, I might have
blasted him
away. Let the police do the
policing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch
"Independent
Lens"' "Tower" online at
PBS.org/independentlens.
And a news update before we
leave you tonight.
The top Republican and Democrat
on the Senate
Judiciary Committee are asking
the U.S. attorney
general and the FBI director for
a briefing
on the circumstances that led to
the resignation
of General Michael Flynn. He
stepped down
this week as national security
adviser over
his contacts with Russia during
the transition.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.